FOREWORD

	The rocket engine is a relatively simple device in which
propellants are burned and the resulting high pressure gases are
expanded through a specially shaped nozzle to produce thrust. Gas
pressurized propellant tanks and simple propellant flow controls make
operation of a small liquid-fuel rocket engine about as simple as
operating an automobile engine. Why then do so many amateur rocket
engines fail or cause injury? The reason, usually and simply, is that
the amateur is not accustomed to high pressure devices operating near
material temperature limits. His normal everyday life is, instead,
filled with devices and gadgets operating at low pressures and at low
thermal energy levels. With proper design, careful workmanship, and
good test equipment operated in a safe manner, the amateur can build
small liquid-fuel rocket engines which will have hours of safe
operating life.
	The purpose of this publication is to provide the serious
amateur builder with design information, fabrication procedures, test
equipment requirements, and safe operating procedures for small
liquid-fuel rocket engines.

INTRODUCTION

	A liquid rocket engine employs liquid propellants which are
fed under pressure from tanks in to a combustion chamber. The
propellants usually consist of a liquid oxidizer and a liquid fuel. In
the comhllstion chamber the propellants chemically react (burn) to
form hot gases which are then accelerated and ejected at high velocity
through a nozzle, thereby imparting momentum to the engine. Momentum
is the product of mass and velocity. The thrust force of a rocket
motor is the reaction experienced by the motor structure due to the
ejection of the high velocity matter. This is the same phenomenon
which pushes a garden hose backward as water squirts from the nozzle
or makes a gun recoil when fired.
	A typical rocket motor consists of the combustion chamber, the
nozzle, and the injector, as shown in Figure 1. The combustion chamber
is where the burning of propellants takes place at high pressure. The
chamber must be strong enough to contain the high pressure generated
by, and the high temperature resulting from, the combustion process.
Because of the high temperature and heat transfer, the chamber and
nozzle are usually cooled. The chamber must also be of sufficient
length to ensure complete combustion before the gases enter the
nozzle.
	The function of the nozzle is to convert the chemical-thermal
energy generated in the combustion chamber into kinetic energy, The
nozzle converts the slow moving, high pressure, high temperature gas
in the combustion chamber into high velocity gas of lower pressure and
temperature. Since thrust is the product of mass (the amount of gas
flowing through the nozzle) and velocity, a very high gas velocity is
desirable. Gas velocities from one to two miles per second (5000 to
12000 feet per second) can be obtained in rocket nozzles.  Nozzles
which perform this seemingly amazing feat are called DeLaval nozzles
(after their inventor) and consist of a convergent and divergent
section, as shown in Figure 2. The minimum flow area between the
convergent and divergent section is called the nozzle throat. The flow
area at the end of the divergent section is called the nozzle exit
area. The nozzle is usually made long enough (or the exit area is
great enough) such that the pressure in the combustion chamber is
reduced at the nozzle exit to the pressure existing outside the
nozzle. If the rocket engine is being fired at sea level this pressure
is about 14.7 pounds per square inch (psi). If the engine is designed
for operation at high altitude, the exit pressure is less than 14.7
psi. The drop in temperature of the combustion gases flowing through
the nozzle is high and can be as much as 2000-3000 F.  Since the gases
in the combustion chamber nay be at 5000-6000 F, the gas temperature
at the nozzle exit is still about 3000 F.

PROPELLANT CHOICE

	Liquid rocket engines can burn a variety of oxidizer - fuel
combinations, some of Which are tabulated in Table I. Most of the
propellant combinations listed are dangerous, toxic, and
expensive. The amateur builder of rocket engines on the other hand,
requires propellants that are readily available, reasonably safe and
easy to handle, and inexpensive. Based on experience, ROCKETLAB
recommends the use of gaseous oxygen as the oxidizer and a hydrocarbon
liquid as the fuel. They give good performance, the combustion flame
is readily visible, and their high combustion temperature presents an
adequate design challenge to the amateur builder. The propellants are
used in the Atlas missile and the Saturn space booster.  In these
systems, however, liquid rather than gaseous oxygen is used as the
oxidizer.
	Gaseous oxygen can be readily and inexpensively obtained in
pressurized cylinders in almost any community because of its use in
oxy-acetylene welding. With reasonable precautions, to be detailed
later, the gas (and cylinder) is safe to handle for rocket test stand
use.  Gas pressures are easily regulated with commercial regulators
and gas flow rate is easily controlled with commercially available
valves.
	Hydrocarbon fuels, such as gasoline and alcohol, are readily
available in any community. Safety precautions are already known by
most responsible individuals due to wide use of the fuels in internal
combustion engines for automobiles and power equipment.
	All subsequent sections of this publication will refer to, and
assume, that the propellants to he used in amateur liquid-fuel rocket
engines are gaseous oxygen and hydrocarbon fuel.
	The flame temperature of hydrocarbon fuels burned in gaseous
oxygen at various combustion cham1)er pressures is shown in Figure 3
for the stoichioometric mixture ratio. Mixture ratio is defined as
the weight flow of oxidizer divided by the weight flow of fuel, or

	O/F = Wo/Wf		(1)

where 

Wo = lb of oxygen/sec
Wf = lb of fuel/sec

	When a stoichiometric ratio is achieved just enough oxygen is
present to chemically react with all the fuel; the highest flame
temperature is achieved under these conditions. If a lower flame
temperature is desired it is usually better to have more fuel present
than oxidizer; this is known as burning "off-ratio" or "fuel-rich."
This condition is less severe on the rocket engine than burning, at
stoichiometric or oxygen-rich conditions.
	Figure 4 indicates how the flame temperature varies when
combustion chamber pressure is held at a constant value and the
mixture ratio is allowed to vary.	

	The thrust developed per pound of total propellant burned per
second is known as specific impulse and is defined as

	Isp = thrust/total propellant flow rate		(2)

Figure 5 indicates the maximum performance possible from hydrocarbon
fuels burned with gaseous oxygen at various chamber pressures with
tile gas expanded to atmospheric pressure. This graph can be used to
determine the propellant flow rate required to produce a certain
thrust. Suppose you wish to design a rocket engine using gaseous
oxygen/gasoline propellants to be burned at a chamber pressure of
200 psi with a thrust of 100 lbs. At these conditions the propellant
performance, from Figure 5, is 244 lb of thrust per lh of propellant
burned per second. Therefore

	Wt = F/Isp = 100/244 = 0.41 lb/sec	(3)

Since the maximum Isp mixture ratio (r) for oxygen/gasoline is 2.5, we
have:

	Wo = Wt r/(r + 1) = O. 293 lb/sec	(4)

	Wf = wt/(r + 1) = 0.117 lb/sec		(5)
	
	Wt = wO + wf		(6)

PROPELLANT PROPERTIES

	The chemical and physical properties of gaseous oxygen,
methyl alcohol, and gasoline are given in Table II.

DESIGN EQUATIONS

	The following section will detail simplified equations for the
design of small liquid-fuel rocket motors. The nomenclature for the
motor design is shown in Figure 6.

Nozzle

	The nozzle throat cross-sectional area may be computed if the
total propellant flow rate is known and the propellants and operating
conditions have been chosen. Assuming perfect gas law theory:

	At = Wt/Pt SQRT(R Tt/(gamma)g_c)	(7)

where R = gas constant, given by R = R_bar/M. R_bar is the universal gas
constant equal to 1545.32 ft-lb/lb(deg)R, and M is the molecular
weight of the gas.  The molecular weight of the hot gaseous products
of combustion of gaseous oxygen /hydrocarbon fuel is about 24, so that
R is about 65 ft-lb/lb(deg)R.
	Gamma, (gamma), is the ratio of gas specific heats and is a
thermodynamic variable which the reader is encouraged to read about
elsewhere (see Bibliography). Gamma is about 1.2 for the products of
combustion of gaseous oxygen/hydrocarbon fuel.
	g_c is a constant relating to the earth's gravitation and is
equal to 32.2 ft/sec/sec.
	For further calculations the reader may consider the following
as constants whenever gasseous oxygen/hydrocarbon propellants are
used:

R = 65 ft-lb/lb(deg)R

(gamma) = 1.2

g_c = 32.2 ft/sec^2

	Tt is the temperature of the gases at the nozzle throat. The
gas temperature at the nozzle throat is less than in the combustion
chamber due to loss of thermal energy in accelerating the gas to the
local speed of sound (Mach number = 1) at the throat. Therefore

	Tt = Tc (1/(1+((gamma)-1)/2))	(8)

For (gamma) = 1.2

	Tt = (.909)(Tc)			(9)

Tc is the combustion chamber flame temperature in degrees Rankine
(degR), given by

	T (degR) = T (degF) + 460	(10)

	Pt is the gas pressure at the nozzle throat. The pressure at
the nozzle throat is less than in the combustion chamber due to
acceleration of the gas to the local speed of sound (Mach number = 1)
at the throat. Therefore

	Pt = Pc(1+((gamma)-1)/2)^((gamma)/((gamma)-1))		(11)

For (gamma) = 1.2

	Pt = (.564)(Pc)		(12)

	The hot gases must now be expanded in the diverging section of
the nozzle to obtain maximum thrust. The pressure of these gases will
decrease as energy is used to accelerate the gas and we must now find
that area of the nozzle where the gas pressure is equal to atmospheric
pressure. This area will then be the nozzle exit area.
 
	Mach number is the ratio of the gas velocity to the local
speed of sound. The Mach number at the nozzle exit is given by a
perfect gas expansion expression

	Me^2 = 2/((gamma)-1)((Pc/Patm)^(((gamma)-1)/gamma) - 1)		(13)

Pc is the pressure in the combustion chamber and Patm is
atmospheric pressure, or 14.7 psi.
	The nozzle exit area corresponding to the exit Mach number
resulting from the choice of chamber pressure is given by 

Ae = At/Me * ((1 + ((gamma)-1)/2 Me^2)/(((gamma)+1)/2))^(((gamma)+1)/2((gamma)-1))	(14)

Since r is fixed at 1.2 for gaseous oxygen/hydrocarbon propellant
products, we can calculate the parameters for future design use; the
results are tabulated in Table III.

TABLE III Nozzle Parameters for Various (chamber
Pressures, (gamma) = 1.2, Patm = 14.7 psi

<table>
</table>

	Ae = At (Ae/At)		(15)

The temperature ratio between the chamber gases
and those at the nozzle exit is given by

	Te = Tc (Te/Tc)		(16)

The nozzle throat diameter is given by

	Dt = SQRT(4At/(pi))	(17)

and the exit diameter is given by

	De = SQRT(4Ae/(pi))	(18)

A good value for the nozzle convergence half-angle (beta) (see Fig. 3)
is 60deg. The nozzle divergence half-angle, (alpha), should be no
greater than 15deg to prevent nozzle internal flow losses.

Combustion Chamber

	A parameter describing the chamber volume required for
complete combustion is the characteristic chamber length, L*, which
is given by

L* =  Vc/At (19)

where Vc is the chamber volume (including the converging section of
the nozzle), in cubic inches, and At is the nozzle throat area
(in2). For gaseous oxygen/hydrocarbon fuels, an L* of 50 to 100 inches
is appropriate.  L* is really a substitute for determining the chamber
residence time of the reacting propellants.
	To reduce losses due to flow velocity of gases within the
chamber, the combustion chamber cross sectional area should be at
least three times the nozzle throat area.
	The combustion chamber cross-sectional area is given by

	Ac = (pi)Dc^2/4		(20)

The chamber volume is given by

	Vc = AcLc + convergent volume		(21)

For small combustion chambers the convergent volume is about 1/10 the
volume of the cylinrical portion of the chamber, so that 

	Vc = 1.1 (AcLc)		(21)

The chamber diameter for small combustion chambers (thrust level less
than 75 lbs) should be three to five times the nozzle throat diameter
so the injector will have usable face area.

Chamber Wall Thickness

	The combustion chamber must be able to withstand the internal
pressure of the hot combustion gases. The combustion chamber must also
be physically attached to the cooling jacket and, therefore, the
chamber wall thickness must be sufficient for welding or brazing
purposes. Since the chamber will be a cylindrical shell, the working
stress in the wall is given by

	S = PD/2t_w		(22)

where P is the pressure in the combustion chamber (neglecting the
effect of coolant pressure on the outside of the shell), D is the mean
diameter of the cylinder, and t_w is the thickness of the cylinder
wall. A typical material for small water-cooled combustion chambers is
copper, for which the allowable working stress is about 8000 psi. The
thickness of the combustion chamber wall is therefore given by

	t_w = PD/16000	   	(23)

This is the minimum thickness; actually the thickness should be
somewhat greater to allow for welding, buckling, and stress
concentration. The thickness of the chamber wall and nozzle are
usually equal.
	Equation (22) can also he used to calculate the wall thickness
of the water cooling jacket.  Here again, the value of t_w will be the
minimum thickness since welding factors and design considertions (such
as 0-rings, grooves, etc.) will usually require walls thicker than
those indicated by the stress equation. A new allowable stress value
must be used in Equation (22), dependent on the jacket material
chosen.

Engine Cooling

	The amateur should not consider building uncooled rocket
engines since they can operate for only a short time and their design
requires a thorough knowledge of heat and mass transfer
engineering. Cooled rocket motors have provision for cooling some or
all metal parts coming into contact with the hot combustion gases. The
injector is usually self-cooled by the incoming flow of
propellants. The combustion chamber and nozzle definitely require
cooling.
	A cooling jacket permits the circulation of a coolant, which,
in the case of flight engines is usually one of the propellants.
However, for static tests and for amateur operation, water is the only
coolant recommended. The cooling jacket consists of an inner and outer
wall. The combustion chamber forms the inner wall and another
concentric but larger cylinder provides the outer wall. The space
between the walls serves as the coolant passage. The nozzle throat
region usually has the highest heat transfer intensity and is,
therefore, the most difficult to cool.
	The energy release per unit chamber volume of a rocket engine
is very large, and can be 250 times that of a good steam boiler or
five times that of a gas turbine combustion chamber. The heat transfer
rate of a rocket engine is usually 20 to 200 times that of a good
boiler.  It is apparent, therefore, that the cooling of a rocket
engine is a difficult and exacting task.  The complete heat transfer
design of a rocket engine is extremely complex and is usually beyond
the capabilities of most amateur builders.  Some important empirical
design guidelines are available, however, and are listed below:

1. Use water as the coolant. 

2. Use copper for the combustion chamber and nozzle walls. 

3. Water flow velocity in the cooling jacket should be 20-50 ft/sec. 

4. Water flow rate should be high enough so that boiling does not
occur. 

5. Extend the water cooling jacket beyond the face of the injector.

6. A steady flow of cooling water is essential.

Heat Transfer

	The largest part of the heat transferred from the hot chamber
gases to the chamber walls is by convection. The amount of heat
transferred by conduction is small and the amount transferred by
radiation is usually less than 25%, of the total. The chamber walls
have to be kept at a temperature such that the wall material strength
is adequate to prevent failure. Material failure is usually caused by
either raising the wall temperature on the gas side so as to weaken,
melt, or damage the wall material or by raising the wall temperature
on the liquid coolant side so was to vaporize the liquid next to the
wall. The consequent failure is caused because of the sharp
temperature rise in the wall caused by exessive heat transfer to
the boiling coolant.
	In water-cooled chambers the transferred heat is absorbed by
the water. The water must have in adequate heat capacity to
prevent toilings of the water at any point in the cooling
jacket. The total heat tranferred from the chamber to the cooling
water is given by

	Q = q A = w_w * c_p * (T - Ti)(24)

where

Q = total heat transferred, Btu/sec
q = average heat transfer rate of chamber, Btu/in^2-sec
A = heat transfer area, in2
w_w = coolant flow rate, Ib/sec
c_p = specific heat of coolant, Btu/lb(deg)F
T = temperature of coolant leaving jacket, degF
Ti = temperature of coolant entering jacket, degF

the use of this equation will be illustrated in the section Example
Design calculation.

Materials

	The combustion chamber and nozzle walls have to withstand
relatively high temperature, high gas velocity, chemical erosion, and
high stress. The wall material must be capable of high heat transfer
rates (which means good thermal conductivity) yet, at the same time,
have adequate strength to withstand the chamber combustion pressure.
Material requirements are critical only in those parts which come into
direct contact with propellant gases.  Other motor components can be
made of conventional material.
	Once the wall material of an operating rocket engine begins to
fail, final burn-through and engine destruction are extremely
rapid. Even a small pinhole in the chamber wall will almost
irmediately (within one second) open into a large hole because the hot
chamber gases (4000-6000 degF) will oxidize or melt the adjacent
metal, which is then blown away exposing new metal to the hot gases.
	Exotic metals and difficult fabrication techniques are used in
today's space and missile rocket engines, providlng a liglllweigl]t
strncture absolutely reduired for efficient latlnch and flight
vehiclcs. These advanced metals and fabrication techniques are far
outside the reach of the serious amateur htlilder. Itowever, ttle use
of more commonplace (and much less expens;ve') metals and fabrication
techniques is (|zSite possible,evcept that a flightweight engine will
not resnlt. Since almost all amatezlr rozket firing sllould be
conducted on a static test stand, this is not a severe restriction to
the amatellr btXild er. Experience with a wide variety of rocket
engine designs leads to the following rcconmendations for amateur
rocket engines:

1. The combustion chamber and nozzle should
be machined in one piece, from copper. 

2. Those injector parts in contact witl the hot chamber gases should also be machined from copper. 

3. The cooling jacket and those injector parts not in contact with the llot propellant gases, should be fabricated from brass or stainless steel. 

4. Expert machine and welding work is essential to produce a safe ançi tXseable rocket engine. Shoddy or careless workmanship, or poor welds, can easily caRlse engine failure.

Injectors

The function of the injector is to intorudce the propellants into the
combustion chamber in sucha a way that efficent combustion can occur.
There are two types of injectors which the amateur buider can consider
for smalle engine design.  One of these is the impinging stream
injector win which the oxideize and fuel are injected through a number
of sepaate holes so that tje resulting strams intersect with each
other. The fuel stream will impinge with the oxidizer stream and both
will break up into small droplets. When gaseous oxugem is used as the
oxidizer, and a liquid hydrocarbon is used as fuel, the impingement of
the liquid stream with the high velocity gas stream results in
diffusion and vaporisation, causing good mixing and efficient
combustion. A disadvantage of this tupe of injector is that extremely
small holes are required for small engine flow rates ant the hydraulic
characterisitcs and equations normally used to priedict injector
parameters do not give good results for small orifices.  The small
holes are also difficult to drill, eseciallyu in soft copper.
	Ilowever, to provid( a complete picture of the equations
used in rocket engine design, we present below the equation for
the flow of liquid through a simple orifice (a round drilled
hole, for example)

	w = Cd A SQRT(2g(rho)(deltaP))		(25)

where

	w = propell;lnt flow rate, lb/sec
	A = area of orifico, ft2
	(deltaP) = presstlre drop across orifice5 lb/ft^2
	(rho) = tJensity of pro;zellanl, lb/ft^3
	g = gravitational constant, 32.2 ft/sec2
	Cd = orifice discharge coefficient


The discharge coefficient for a well-shaped simPlc orifice will
usually have a between 0.5 and 0.7.
	The injection velocity, or vclocitX of the liquid stream
issuing from the orifice, is given by

	v = Cd SQRT(2g((deltaP)/(rho)))		(26)

Injection pressure drops of 70 to 150 psi, or injection vclocities of
50 to 100 ft/sec are usually used in small liquid-fuel rocket
engines. The injection pressure drop must be high enough to
eliminate combustion instability inside the combustion chamber but
must not be so high that the tankage and pressurization system used
to supply fuel to the engine is penalized.
	A second type of injector is the spray nozzle in which
conical, solid cone, hollow cone, or other type of spray sheet can be
obtained . When a liquid hydrocarbon fuel is forccd tl]rough a spray
nozzle (similar to those used in home oil burners) the resulting fuel
droplets are easily mixed with gaseous Oxygen and the resulting
mixture readily vaporized and burned.  Spray nozzles are especially
attractive for the amateur builder since several companies manufacture
them commercially for oil burners and other applications. The amateur
need only determine the size and spray characteristics required for
lXis engine design and the Correct spray nozzle can then be pnrchascd
at low Cost. Figure 7 il]ustrates the two types of iniectors.
	The usc of Connnercial spray nozzles for amatenrbtlilt rocket
cngines is higlX]v recommended.

Figure 7 Fuel injectors for Amatuer Rocket Engines.

EXAMPLE DESIGN CALCULATION

	Thee following example illustrat(s the use of the equations,
tables and concepts presented in the previous sections.

	A small water-cooled liquid-fuel rocket engine is to be
designed for a chamber pressure of 300 psi and a thrElst of 20
lbs. The engine is to operate at sea level using gaseous oxygen and
gasoline propellants.

Step 1

	From Table I and Figures 3,4 and 5 we determine that the
optimum O/F ratio is about 2.5 and that the ideal specific
impulsc will be abotlt 260 sec. The total [)rol)ellant flow rate is
given by Equation (3)

	Wt = F/Isp = 20/260 = 0.077 lb/sec

Since the mixture ratio, r, is 2.5, we find from Equation (5)

	Wf = wt/(r + 1) = 0.077/3.5 = 0.022 lb/sec

From Equation (6) the oxygen flow rate i s

	Wo = 0.077 - 0.022 = 0.055 lb/sec

As a check, we divide the oxygen flow rate by the fuel flow rate and
the result is 2.5, as it should be. 

Step 2

	From Table I we note that the chamber gas temperattlrc is 5742
degF or about 6202 degR.
From Eqttation (9) the gas temperature at the nozzle throat is

	Tt = .909 (Tc) = .909 (6202) = 5650 R

Step 3

	From Equat ;on (12) the pressure at the nozz I e throat i s

Pt = .564 (Pc) = .564 (300) = 169 psi

Step 4

	The nozzle throat arca is given by Equation (7)

	At = (w/Pt)(RTt/(gamma)g_c)^(1/2)

	At = (.077/169)(9500)^(1/2) = 0.0444 in^2

Step 5

	The nozzle throat diameter is given by Equation (17)

	Dt = (4At/(pi))^(1/2) = (0.0566)^(1/2) = 0.238 in.

Step 6

	From Table III we find that for a chamber pressure of 300 psi
and a nozzle exit pressure of 14.7 psi (sea level)

	Ae/At = 3.65

so that the nozzlc exit arca is, from Eq. (15)

	Ae = 3.65 At = (3.655)(0.0444) = 0.162 in^2

Step 7

	The nozzle exit diameter is from Eq. (17)

	De = (4Ae/(pi))^(1/2) = (.2065)^(1/2) = 0.4555 in.

Step 8

	For this propellant combination we will assume a combustion
chamber L* of 60 inches. The combustion chamber volume is given by
Eq. (19)

	Vc = L* At = (60)(.0444) = 2.67 in^3

Step 9

	The chamber length is found from Eq. (21)

	Vc = (1.1) (Ac Lc)

	However, we must first determine the chamber area or Ac. We do
this by assuming that the chamber diameter is five times the nozzle
throat diameter or Dc = 5Dt, therefore 

	Dc = 1.2 in. and Ac = 1.13 in^2

Therefore,

	Lc = Vc/(1.1)(1.13) = 2.67/1.245 = 2.15 in

Step 10

	Copper will be used for the combustion chamber and nozzle
wall. The chamber waII thickness, is given by Eq. (23)

	t_w = PD)/16000 = (300)(1.2)/16000

	t_w = 0.0225 inch

To allow for additional stress and welding factors we shall set the
wall thickness equal to 3/32 or 0.09375 inch and will assume that the
nozzle wall has this thickness also.

Step 11

	Previous exT)erience with small watereooled rocket engines
llas shown that we ean exy)eet the eopr)er eombustion ehamber and
nozzle to experience an average heat transfer rate, q, of ahout 3
Btu/in^2-sec. The heat transfer area of the combustion chamber is the
outer surfaee area of the ehamher and nozzle. This surfaee area is
given by

	A = (pi)(Dc + 2t_w)(Lc) + area of nozzle cone

	A = 9.4 in^2 + area of nozzle cone

The area of tile nozzle eone up to the throat ean be assumed to he
ahout 10% of the ehamber surfaee area so that

	A = (1.1)(9.4) = 10.35 in^2

The total heat transferred into the eoolant is given by Eq. (24)

	Q = q A = 3(10.35) = 31 Btu/sec

Step 12

	The cooIing water flow rate ean be calculated by asssuming
a desired temperature rise of the water. If this is 40degF then,
from Eq. (24)

	w_v = Q/(deltaT), where c_p for water = 1.0

	w = 31/40 = 0.775 lb of water per sec.

Step I3

	The annular flow passage between the eombusti(n chan|I)er wall
and the outer jacket must be sized so that the flow veIocity of the
cooling water is at least 30 ft/sec. This veloeity is obtained when
the flow passage has dimensions as determined below:

	v_w = w_w/(rho)A

where v_w = 30 ft/sec, w_w = 0.775 lb/sec, (rho) = 
62.4 Ih/ft3, and A is the area of the annular
flow passage, given by

A = ((pi)/4) (D2^2 - D1^2)

where D2 is the inner diameter of the outer jacket and D1 is the
outer diameter of the combustion chamber, given by

D1 = Dc + 2t_w

Substituting in the above equations

	D2 = SQRT((4w_w)/(v_w(rho)(pi)) + D1^2)
	
	D2 = (.0151)^(1/2) = .123 ft = 1.475 inch

	D2 - D1 = 0.085 inch

The water flow gap is 0.0425 inch.

Step 14

	The fuel injector for this small rocket engine will he a
commercial spray nozzle with a 75 spray angle. The required capacitv
of the nozzle is determined by the fuel flow rate

Wf = 0.022 Ib/sec = 1.32 lb/ minute,

Since there are six pounds of gasoline per gallon, the spray nozzle
flow requirement is 0.22 gallon per minute (gpm). The spray nozzlc
can now be ordered from any of several suppliers (see List of
Suppliers); nozzle material should be brass to ensure adequate
injector heat transfer to the incoming propellant.
	If an impinging jet injector had been chosen, the
determination of the requirecd injector hole nuWrher and size would
have been as follows:

	The flow area for fuel injection is given by Equation (25)

	A = w_f/(Cd) (2g(rho)(deltaP))^(1/2)

We will assume that Cd = 0.7 with a fuel injcction pressvlre drop
of 100 psi. The density of gasoline is ahollt 44.5 lb/ft3, so that

	A = .022/(.7)(6430) = 0.0000049 ft^2

	A = 0.000706 in^2

	If only one injection hole is used (a poor practice which can
lead to combustion instability) its diameter would be

	D = (4A(pi))^(1/2) = (.0009)^(1/2) = 0.30 inch

A number 69 drill could be used for this hole.

	If two injection holes are used, their diameter would be

	D = (.00045)^(1/2) = 0.021 inch

A number 75 drill could be used for these holes.

Step 15

	The injection holes for the gaseous oxygen will be simple
drilled orifices.  The size of these orifices should be sich that a
gas stream velolity or about 200 ft/sec is obtained at design
oxygen flow rate. The holes must not be so small that sonic velocity
is achieved in the orifice passages since this would result in a high
upstream pressure requirement to drive the required amount of oxygen
through the orifices.
	If a spray nozzle fuel injector is used we will assume the use
of four equally spaced oxygen injection ports parallel to the
combustion chamher centerline around this nozzle. If we assume an
injection pressure drop of 100 psi then the oxygen gas pressure at the
entrance to the injection ports will be 400 psi (the chamber pressure
plus the injection pressure drop). The density of gaseous oxygen at
400 psi and a temperature of 68degF is given by the perfect gas law
(see Table II).

	(rho2) = (rho1)(P2/P1) = 2.26 Ib/ft^3

Assuming, incompressibility, the injection flow area is given by

	A = w_o/(rho)v_o

	Since we know the oxygen flow rate and the desired injection
velocity, we can easily find the total injection area

	A = .055/(2.26)(200) = 0.0001217 ft^2

	A = 0.0175 in^2

Since there are to he four holes, each hole has an area of 0.004375
in^2 and the diameter of each hole is

	D = (.00558)^(1/2) = 0.0747 inch

A number 48 drill could be used for these holes. 
	These same size oxygen jets could also be used with two fuel
jets in the impinging stream injector. The holes, oxygen and fuel,
should be drilled at an angle of 45(deg) with respect to the injector
face with the intersection point of the streams about 1/4 inch inside
the combustion chamber.

Design

	The foregoing design calculations provide the dimensions,
thicknesses, and orifice sizes for the major components of our rocket
engine. The actual design of the engine, however, requires engineering
judgment and knowledge of machining, welding, and operational factors
since these interact to determine the final configuration of the
engine and its components. Perhaps the best way to accomplish the
final design is to sit down with appropriate drafting materials and
begin to draft a cross-section view of the engine. A scale of 2/1 (or
twice actual size) is about right for these small engines and will
enable the designer to better visualize the entire assembly.
	Using the dimensions obtained in the example calculation, and
the design technique described shove, the rocket engine assembly
design shown in Figure 8 is obtained. The engine design features easy
fabrication and assembly.

FABRICATION

	The fabrication and assembly of a small liquid fuel rocket
engine is no more difficult than the more serious amateur machine
projects, such as model steam engines, gasoline engines, and
turbines.  Because the rocket engine has no rotating parts,
dynamic balance of components is not reqtlired.  However, the
use of quality, homogeneous materials and careful fabrication
technique are definitely required to produce a safe, working
rocket engine.
	A properly desgined small liquid-fuel rocket engine
requires the following machine and hand tools:

1. 6" or 10" metal-turning lathe, with attachments
2. Precision drill press
3. hand files, calipers, micrometers, etc.
4. oxy-acetylene torch or small arc welder.

Since a properly desiglled engine will have symmetrical parts, a
milling machine or planer will not be required. The metal-turning
lathe should have a repeatable accuracy of 0.001 inch. The drill press
will he used to drill small diameter holes and should have a true
running, high speed chuck.

Mensuration equipment such as calipers micrometers, etc., must be
capable of inside and outside, diameter measurements, lengths, and
should be used to locate holes, recesses, and other features prior to
actual machining.
	The joining of the various engine components is especially
critical since the engine will operate at high pressure and high
temperature.

Figure 8 Assembly drawing of small liquid-fuel rocket engine. (1)
injector assembly, (2)O-ring, (3) liquid fuel, (4) gaseous oxygen (5)
engine mount, (6) coolant, (7) fuel spray nozzle, (8) combustion
chamber, (9) outer shell, (10) coolant.

The ability of the welder, and the welding techniques employed, should
be as good as those required for aircraft work. Metal joints must be
clean, vith a close fit between parts to ensure adequate weld strength
and integrity. To the extent possible assembled conponents should be
tested with water (or nitrogen gas, but that is dangerous) prior to
actual use with propellants. Repair of leaks or initially poor welds
must be carefully done with subsequent re-testing with pressurized
water (called hyrdo-testing or hydrostatic testing).
	As discussed previously, the combustion chamber should built
as a one piece unit.  This arrangement, while more difficult to from a
machining point of view, eliminates the requirement for a joint of
some knd between the two parts; this joint would be exposed to the hot
combustion gases (5700 degF) on one side and would, in all
probability, fail.  Building the combustion chamber and nozzle in one
piece eliminates this potential failure point.  Care must be exercised
during the machining of the copper chamber-nozzle to ensure constant
wall thichness and the correct taper in the nozzle region.  Thin wall
sections are potential failure points and could result in almost
immediate catastrophic failure during firing.
	Machining of the outer shell or jacket is less critical than
the combustion chamber-nozzle.  Typical materials for this part are
stainless steel or brass. the inside diameter of the shell should have
a smooth finish to reduce cooling pressure drop, nnd the outside
finish of the shell, which will be visible to the world, should
reflect the care and concern of the machinist.  The shell will also
contain the coolant entry and exit ports. Since the coolant (typically
water) will probably have an entry pressure of 60 to 100 psi, these
ports and fittings should be constructed with some care. The use of
flare type fittings with metal tapered seats (such as those
manufactured by Parker or Weatherland) is highly reccomended.  The
shell will also feature a method of attaching the injector and for
mounting the engine to a test or thrust stand.  As shown in Figure 8,
these two mounting requirements can be easily combined to simplify the
design.  The forces to be considered when designing the shell are not
the thrust forces (which are small, typically on the order ot 20-30
lbs) but, rather the pressure forces attempting to serarate the
injector from the shell.  The pressure acting on the injector area out
to the point of sealingbetween the injector and the outer shell is the
combistion chamber pressure, which is typically 100 to 300 psi.  THe
force attempting to separate the injector from the shell is slightly
over 600 lbs for the design shown in Figure 8 at a combiestion
pressure of 300 psi.  The bolts holding the two components together
(and in this case also holding the assembly to the test mount) must
withstand this force with and adequate safety factor (typically a
factor of two).  THe number and size of bolts required can be obtained
from Table IV, which gives the average load capacity of high strength
steel bolts of various sizes.  The strength of these bolts, however,
depends to some extent on the adequacy of the threads in tapped holes,
the tapped material, and the bolt tightening procedure used in
assembly.

TABLE IV Average Load CapaciLy of
high Strength Steel Bolts, SF = 2

Bolt Size | Load Capacity, lb

10-32		1500
1/4-20		2400
1/4-28		2750
3/8-16		5800

	The outer shell must also contain a sealing device to prevent
the high pressure combustion chamber gas from glowing back past the
injector.  With an appropriately configured water-cooled design, the
use of an elastomeric O-ring is highly desirable.  A standard neoprene
O-ring (manufactured by a number of companies, see List of Suppliers)
will give reliable service if the surrounding metal does not exceed a
temperature of 200-300 degF .  Dimenstions and design parameters for
O-rings and O-ring grooves are given in maufacturers supply catalogs.

	Another method of sealing is the use of an asbestos-copper
crush gasket (very similar to those used on automobile sparkplugs,
only larger; see List of Suppliers).  The copper crush gasket is
positioned by a V-groove cut in the surface of the outer jacket at the
sealing point. The mating surface of the injector should be smooth and
flat with no machine marks.

	Figure 9 illustrates the relationship between an O-ring and a
copper crush gasket and their mating surfaces.


Figure 9 Detail on O-ring and crush gasket sealing methods. O-ring
groove dimensions are critical and should be obtained from suppliers
handbooks. Crush gasket groove dimensions are non-critical; groove
depth should be about 1/3 the thickness of uncrushed gasket.

 	The injector should be fabricated from copper to provide
maximum heat transfer from the injector face to the incoming
propellants. The outer shell of the injector can be made from either
copper, stainless steel, or brass. However, since the propellant inlet
fittings (again these should be the tapered seat, metal-to-metal kind)
should he stainless steel for best results.  It is usually a good idea
to make the injector outer shell from stainless steel so that the
inlet fittings can be arc welded. Then the outer shell can be attached
to the remainder of the injector by silver brazing without weakening
the inlet fitting welds.
	Injection holes for the gaseous oxygen (and for the fuel, if
impinging jets are used) will usually be made with numbered drills of
small diameter.  Extreme care should be used in drilling these holes,
especially in soft copper.  The drilled hole should have an entry and
exit free from burrs or chips.  It is vitally important that injector
components be thoroughly cleaned and deburred prior to assembly.
After injector welding, hot water should be used to thoroughly clean
the injector assembly of brazing flux and residues, and the assembly
should receive a final rinse in acetone or alcohol.

TESTING EQUIPMENT

	In this section we shall discuss the auxilliary equipment
needed to operate the rocket engine, the installation of this
equipment, and its safe use in engine operation.

Feed System

	The feed system for amateur rocket engine testing consists of
a tank to store the liquid fuel, a regulated supply of high pressure
nitrogen gas to force the fuel from the tank into the engine, a
regulated supply of high pressure gaseous oxygen, and a control device
for regulating the propellant flow rates. A typical pressurizing feed
system is shown schematically in Figure 10.

Feed System Components

	The compontnts of a rocket engine feed system are precision
instruments designed to handle gas and/or liquids at high pressure.
While many of the components suitable for use in amateur rocket 
feed systems are readily available from welding or automohile parts
suppliers they are usually relatively expensive. The amateur
builder should expect the assembly of the feed system to be an 
expensive  project which, however, need be done only once. The use of
quality products, made to do the job or very carefully modified and
pre-tested, is mandatory for safe operation of amateur rocket engines.

	High Pressure Gas Cylinders

	Gases stored in cylinders at high pressure (usually about 1800
psi) are readily obtained from any bottled gas supplier or from many
welding suppliers.  Special fittings with nonstandard threads are used
to prevent use of incorrect equipment with the cylinders.  Although
cylinders can be purchased, they are usually rented and then returned
to the supplier for recharge at a nominal fee. High pressure gas
cylinders should never he dropped or mishandled. Cylinders should be
stored so they cannot fall over or inadvertently roll; the best way of
securing is to chain or strap the cylinders to an appropriate stand or
worktable. When cylinders are not in use the cap should be kept on to
protect the cylinder valve. Several suppliers of high pressure gases
publish instruction books on the care and use of high pressure
cylinders (see Bibliography); the amateur is encouraged to read and
follow these professional instructions.

Figure 10 Schematic diagram of gas pressure feed system. Propellants
are a liquid fuel and gaseous oxygen. (1) high pressure gaseous
nitrogen supply, (2) pressure regulator, (3) check valve, (4) fuel
tank, (5) gaseous oxygen cylinders, (6) relief valve, (7) vent
valve, (8) fill port, (9) drain valve, (10) remotely operated
propellant control valve, (11) fuel filter, (12) purge valve, (13)
rocket engine. P is pressure gauge.

Gaseous Nitrogen

	Nitrogen is an inert gas compatible with all normally
available materials. The amateur builder will have little
dificulty with materials of construction for nitrogen but must be
careful that all components are suitable for high
pressure service. Cleanliness of components is important for
proper and reliable operation,

Gaseous Oxygen

	Oxygen will not itself burn but does vigorously support the
rapid combustion of almost all other materials. The amateur must be
concerned not only with suitablility of components for high pressure
service but also must use only conponents that are made frem oxygen
compatible materials and that are cleaned for oxygen service.  All
items, including lines, fittings, valves, regulators, etc., MUST be
absolutely free from oil, grease, and similar contaminants. lhorough
cleaning of all items in solvent, followed by a complete rinse in
acetone, is an absolute must.  Orders for commercial items should he
marked to indicate their intended use with high pressure gaseous
oxygen.  Many commercial suppliers of valves and regulators offer a
special service for cleaning their products for oxygen service.  The
amateur should avail himself of these services whenever possible, even
though they will add slightly to the initial cost of the component.
	When cleaning components with soltent or acetone, the amateur
builder should observe all rules of safety applying to these
chemicals.  They are toxic and easily ignited.  Cleaning should be done
outside and away from huildings, fires, or other possible ignition
sources. These fluids should not be stored indoors but in vented
lockers away from main buildings.

Fuel Tank

	The fuel tank is a closed vessel which contains the liquid
fuel at moderate pressure (300-500 psi).  Tanks of various sizes and
shapes, made from carbon or stainless steel, are offered to the public
from war surplus outlets.  The amateur builder should be very careful
if he decides to use such a tank.  They should not be modified since
in nearly all cases they are thin wall pressure vessels made for
aircraft service, and additional outlets or welding to the tank wall
could seriously weaken the tank.  In all cases the tank should be
hydrostatically tested to at least 1 1/2; times desired operating
presure before use in the rocket engine feed system.
	The amateur may build (or have built) a tank especially for
his requirements.  Seamless tubing or pipe (mild steel or stainless
steel) with welded flat end plates makes an excellent tank.  Outlet
ports are easily tapped in the flat end plates, The tank wall
thickness is given by Equation (22)

	t_w = PD/2S

where P is the pressure in the tank (1 1/2 times the desired operating
pressure), D is the outside diameter of the tank, t_w is the wall
thickness, and S is the allowable stress. The size of the tank is
determined by the size of the rocket engine and the desired operating
time. The engine discussed in Example Design Calculation had a fuel
flow rate of 0.022 lb/sec. A tank with a 4-inch inside diameter and 12
inches long would hold enough gasoline to run this engine for 175
seconds. If the tank outside diameter is 4.5 inches, the allowable
stress in the steel is 20,000 psi, and the operating pressure is 500
psi so that the design pressure is 750 psi, a tank minimum wall
thickness of 0.085 inch is calculated. A wall thickness of 0.250 inch
is chosen to allow for welding factors, stress concentrations, and the
size of available seamless tubing. The tank inside diameter is 4.0
inches. The flat end plates for this tank should be at least twice
the thickness of the tank wall (i.e. for this case, at least 1/2
inch thick). Drilling and tapping should be done prior to welding, to
prevent oil and metal chips from falling into the tank.  Welding
should be done by an expert with several passes for each end plate
(see Figure 11).  End plate ports should then be re-tapped. The tank
should be thoroughly cleaned and hydrostatically tested prior to use
in the rocket engine feed system.
	The fuel tank should contain enough ports, or the tank
plumbing should be so arranged, that a safety relief valve (either
spring loaded or a burst disc), gas inlet port, load and vent port,
and fuel outlet and drain are available.  Many of these functions can
be incorporated as part of the gas inlet and fuel outlet plumbing so
that only two ports, one on each end of the tank are required.

Figure 11 Fuel tank end detail. Several weld passes should be used to
attach the end plates to the seamless tubing.
